---
title: "Benefits of a good after school program"
date: 2025-10-20T23:45:02-08:00
description: "26 after school activities Tips for Web Success"
featured_image: "/images/26 after school activities.jpg"
tags: ["26 after school activities"]
---

Benefits of a good after school program

Children grow up in a society that demands expertise in everything. You
really cannot sit back and decide that learning from textbooks is enough 
for the overall development of your child. It's the age of specialization 
and your child cannot afford to miss out on this window of opportunity. 
So, scour your locality for the most advantageous programs and enroll them 
for the ones you think are the best.

After school programs are basically designed to develop a talent or a 
skill that is ignored by regular schools. These programs could be 
educational or recreational in nature. Whatever type they are, they 
basically aim to keep the child active and interested. 

The most important advantage of a good after school program is that it 
widens your child's area of interests. He or she is introduced to new 
things, sometimes interesting, sometimes challenging. Mastering a new art 
form or a new skill increases the child's self-esteem. It also allows you 
to introduce your child to new career options. A child attending a music 
class may decide that she likes it so much that she wants to make a career 
out of it in the long run. 

Socialization is another great advantage of after school programs. 
Children get to meet others who share their interests and make new 
friendships. An acting class or a soccer class can be lots of fun. Many of 
these programs coach children for performances or matches. Performing on 
stage or playing a match can be a great experience for a young child. 

After school programs keep your teenager busy. He or she thus has some 
amount of protection from destructive habits like drugs and alcohol. 
Surveys indicate that children who are kept busy through diverse absorbing 
activities are less prone to abuse, depression and burnout. Significant 
increase in achievement and attendance and a reduction in drop out rates 
are other advantages of a good after school programs.

Most after school programs have children interacting with one or more 
adult. This allows them to benefit from positive relationships with 
adults. Children often find it difficult to confide in parents and 
teachers, but may open up with other adults. 

Many children are put into recreational after school programs so that they 
reduce weight and remain healthy. A newly emerging trend shows that about 
15% children below the age of 16 are obese. Parents who cannot put their 
children on a strict diet resort to sports and games to burn fat. With 
cases of child diabetes on the increase, this has become a prime focus of 
many after school programs.

A good after school program has many benefits. It keeps the child 
entertained as well as busy, and thus prevents children from becoming 
addicted to TVs and PCs. By giving them ways to burn up their excess energy 
and explore their creativity, after school programs help to shape the 
overall personality of the child. 

(word count 484)

PPPPP
