---
title: "Affiliate Tracking Software Review:  ShareResults"
date: 2020-12-22T14:11:02-08:00
description: "Tracking Software Tips for Web Success"
featured_image: "/images/Tracking Software.jpg"
tags: ["Tracking Software"]
---

Affiliate Tracking Software Review:  ShareResults 
If you are a small business owner who is interested in increasing their sales with the use of an affiliate program, there are a number of important things that you will have to examine. One of those things includes the use of affiliate tracking software.  Affiliate tracking software is what makes an affiliate program possible. It is used to track affiliates and determine if and when they helped your business generate a sale.  This means that to have a successful affiliate program, you need to have affiliate tracking software.
If you have never purchased affiliate tracking software before, you may be unsure how to get started.  Perhaps, the easiest way to find affiliate tracking software is by using the internet.  You should be able to find a number of different software programs and services by performing a standard internet search.  In your search, it is likely that you will come cross a company known as ShareResults.  ShareResults is an online company that specializing is assisting business owners and their affiliates by providing them with outstanding services and tracking abilities.
When it comes to ShareResults and any other software program, you may be wondering what makes their software worth the cost.  Honestly, there are a number of things that make a particular affiliate tracking software worth the cost. This includes, but should not be limited to, the company’s performance ratings and the software’s available services and features. To determine whether or not ShareResults can provide you with what you are looking for, you are encouraged to learn more about their software.
Although ShareResults is considered a provider of affiliate tracking software, you actually do not have to install any software on your computer. Unique banners and links should be enough to get you started with this program.  In fact, since no software installation is required, you will find that ShareResults is compatible with most computers and operating systems.  This means that you should not have to obtain and install additional computer programs.  
What is unique about ShareResults is that they are selective when it comes to choosing a business to work with. Many other affiliate tracking software programs and services will accept any business that needs or wants to use their service. ShareResults closely evaluates each business before granting them permission to use their services.  This evaluation may focus on the type of business, how long the business has been operating, and the average revenue of that business.  
When you first get started with ShareResults, if you are approved, you will be provided with a users guide. This guide is extremely important because it will outline everything that you need to know about the affiliate tracking software. In addition to a user’s manual, ShareResults has a large staff that closely works with their business partners. That staff should be able to offer you assistance whenever you need it.
One of the most popular features found on ShareResult’s affiliate tracking software is the ability to offer different pay structures. Essentially, this means that you do not have to pay all of your affiliates the same amount of money.  If you choose to reward your affiliates with a commission percentage, you will just have to alert ShareResults to that percentage. These varied commission levels make it easier for you to reward well performing affiliates.  
Varied commission levels are just one of the many features that you will find with ShareResults.  For additional information on their affiliate tracking software, including the cost of using it, you will want to examine their online website. That website can be found by visiting http://www.shareresults.com.
PPPPP
Word Count 597

