---
title: "Exploring the British Journal of Criminology"
date: 2020-11-05T20:20:12-08:00
description: "criminology Tips for Web Success"
featured_image: "/images/criminology.jpg"
tags: ["criminology"]
---

Exploring the British Journal of Criminology

There are a number of studies and journals that are involved in the discussion of criminology.  One of the most widely read and well reputed journals that study and examine criminology would be the British Journal of Criminology.  Quality pieces and articles that are contributed from sources from around the world are gathered in issues of the British Journal of Criminology.  It is very easy for individuals, either from a scholarly or academic perspective or even those from a researcher’s perspective, to use the British Journal of Criminology as a reference source because of the reputation that the Journal has.  However, it does not just expose the work of different academics, but also publishes articles that peers write and have reviewed, as well as a book review segment within the Journal.  

The British Journal of Criminology has its publishing basis within the United Kingdom, but its shipment range is much more expansive and in fact spans the entire globe.  Regardless of their place of residency in the world, individuals can subscribe to the British Journal of Criminology.  Even if an individual does not wish to subscribe to the British Journal of Criminology, it is also fairly easy to locate the Journal at libraries.  Many back issues are supported in the libraries because of the notoriety that it receives in the literary world as well as in the world of the criminologist.  Regardless of whether or not an individual is able or willing to secure a subscription to the British Journal of Criminology, the many different articles that are featured can have a profound effect on the individuals that read them.  There are a number of different topics that are explored with each issue, and this allows the reader to learn about various aspects of the human mind when it is exposed to crime, and crime’s effect on the community.  Some of the perspectives that the articles deal with include criminology’s relationship with sociology, anthropology, law, social fields and social work, and economics.  By exploring the different ways in which these varying and equally important aspects play out in crime and within the criminal mind, individuals are able to broaden the ways in which they relate to and experience crime and the individual criminal, at least on an intellectual level.

Many instances exist in which an individual would want to reference the different thoughts and feelings expressed within the British Journal of Criminology.  Sometimes a student will need to cite different sources in order to back up a particular thesis or type of thought which can be improved by some of the articles that have been published in the Journal.  In other instances, the thoughts and ideas of others can be built upon in order to further define an individual’s belief of crime and the criminal element.  By establishing a theory with supporting elements, it is possible for an individual that was published in the journal to be contacted and asked to help in a criminal case.  In many instances, this is done on the part of the author by elaborating on the conclusions that they have come to in their article or journal pieces.     

