---
title: "Why Consult the Canadian Journal of Criminology"
date: 2019-02-18T12:56:24-08:00
description: "criminology Tips for Web Success"
featured_image: "/images/criminology.jpg"
tags: ["criminology"]
---

Why Consult the Canadian Journal of Criminology

Undergraduates are required to take a number of different courses during their schooling.  Before the students can graduate with a degree in Criminology, certain criteria needs to be met.  While the specific criteria can vary from school to school, there are some minimum requirements that the students need to meet regardless of where the go to school in order to receive their degree.  Many people may end up being surprised by the number of different fields in which the Criminology major must spend time, but this is all part of the learning process that will eventually allow the individual to become well rounded in many areas, perfectly suited for the many roles in which criminologists function by combining insights about different categories in order to piece together a puzzle.  Criminal elements are unique a fair amount of the time, and it is through the schooling process involving the individual in fields that extend past comfortable boundaries in which the student will be able to learn the most.  In addition to taking classes about law, government, politics, sociology, anthropology and psychiatry, many students will also need to take classes in chemistry or some other science.

Over the course of their studies, students will come to realize that there are a number of papers that they will need to write and turn in to their professors.  This will require them to come up with a compelling thesis and have enough evidence to support the thesis.  As a method of support, many professors encourage or demand the use of outside sources.  For over a decade, the internet has been a very popular choice as a resource for material to use when students have papers due.  In college and graduate programs, however, many professors will allow some internet sources, but not all.  There are a number of journals that an individual can use in order to expertly back up their thesis.  The Canadian Journal of Criminology is one such effective journal.  It is widely available in most libraries due to the fact that it is a particularly useful source for articles and documents outlining the theories, concerns and solution ideas of the authors that contribute to the journal.  There are a number of articles that focus on Canada and the crime element in the specific county, but there are some more far reaching articles as well.  Looking at different environments and results helps individuals to look at the scenarios objectively in order to come up with ideas as to why crime exists in certain geographical locations and what contributes to the criminal element within the individual mind.

By enabling many people to contribute to the Canadian Journal of Criminology, the publishers are able to enjoy their journal being used as a reference source much more.  It expands the environment to which the journal is describing, effective expanding their target audience.  By using such journals as the Canadian Journal of Criminology, students can be assured that they are using a reputable source as a supplier of information for their term papers.  Unfortunately in too many cases, sources on the internet do not have the same kind of reputable backing as the Canadian Journal of Criminology has.

