---
title: "Overview of Criminology"
date: 2021-07-20T04:17:24-08:00
description: "criminology Tips for Web Success"
featured_image: "/images/criminology.jpg"
tags: ["criminology"]
---

Overview of Criminology

When investigators are examining and studying crime from a scientific perspective, this is referred to as criminology.  This includes the parallels between crime and different forms of phenomenon such as the development of particular types of laws.  Criminology also works to identify how to address the criminal behavior of criminals and how to eventually control the criminal element.  Drawing on psychological and sociological research, criminologists are able to look at the different ways in which a criminal’s environment will affect them.  It can also help when it comes to profiling criminals in order to understand them and have a better chance of catching a criminal that is on the loose.  By using criminology, individuals are able to not only profile a potential perpetrator, but they are also able to take a more intellectual look at how crime is perpetuated in our world and what steps can be taken in order to limit crime.  

There are different schools of thought when it comes to how individuals approach the concept of criminology.  Some of the most popular schools include those that are known as the Classical school, the Positivist school and the Chicago school.  These schools were developed over a period of time, ranging from the middle of the 19th century and continuing well into the 20th century with the Chicago school of thought.  One of the main factors that differentiate the schools of thought would be how the criminologists view environment in the life of the criminal.  Some believe that the criminals have to take responsibility for their actions regardless of what is happening in the environment at the time, in line with the Classical movement, while others believe that criminals may be predisposed to crime, as is proposed by the Positivists.  The Chicago school of thought poses the possibility that criminals are able to learn deviant behaviors from others and that when social organizations, such as schools and neighborhoods, are not organized they will not be able to control the criminal element that occurs.  By identifying how an individual feels that crime is either created or continued, it can provide the basis for the school of thought that the individual falls under when it comes to criminology.

Criminology experts look at crime in a variety of different manners.  By defining the distinctions between the different types of crimes, it is easier to come up with theories as to how and why the crime took place.  One type of crime would be those that go against core values.  These seemingly natural laws are ones that are common among many different cultures, separated by time and space.  Natural laws are those that are considered to be able to protect individuals and their property from abuse by others.  Some of the more controversial laws include statutes which are put into place by legal institutions.  The relationship between state and citizen is explored in these laws, which is what causes the conflict in some instances.  As a result of looking at the different construction foundations behind laws, it is possible to understand the many different ways in which crimes are categorized.  Organized crime, state crime, blue or white collar crimes and organized crime are some of the most popular types of crime that exist.

