---
title: "Criminology Views on Crime Exposed"
date: 2019-12-18T03:25:00-08:00
description: "criminology Tips for Web Success"
featured_image: "/images/criminology.jpg"
tags: ["criminology"]
---

Criminology Views on Crime Exposed

Criminology is a theoretical science that is used in order to try to explain not only the relationship between the criminal and society, but also the relation of judiciary committee in the social setting and the criminal element in the social setting as well.  By looking at different pieces of the scientific puzzle, it is possible for many people to come up with theories to explain how society functions with crime, in response to it and as a means to perpetuate the crimes.  Through these specific theories, it is possible for individuals to understand some different stances on how crime is created in a society and how a society may influence an individual’s decision to commit a particular crime.  In some cases, it is also used in order to determine how time and the general implications on moral and immoral behavior in a society.  This can be one of the biggest considerations that are taken when a government is thinking about making an amendment to their laws.

For example, homosexuality was considered, for a long time, to be illegal within the United Kingdom, including England.  However, what ended up happening in 1967 was that a law was passed that allowed individuals to act in homosexual ways if they chose to, but only if the individual was over the age of 21.  This helps to expose that there was likely nothing wrong with the specific act, but the people of the time that viewed the act.  This is how criminology approaches crime.  They look at the specific crime, and then look to determine how society or laws may have affected the crime at that period of time.  As a result, criminologists are able to use these crimes and examples in order to understand more fully how individuals react in a society when it comes to laws and regulations.  Criminology does not study crimes and specific laws.  Rather, they simply study the reactions between individuals that are exposed to this type of situation.  This helps them to be able to accurately understand how society functions.  Crime seems to be an inevitable part of society.  If we can one day understand why this is so, we stand a better chance of being able to one day eliminate crime from different societies.   

Criminology is a unique field because it does not try to eliminate crime conclusively right now.  They understand that first it is necessary to research and understand how society and crime are interrelated in different societies.  Once this is clearly understood, we can begin to eliminate the criminal elements within a society.  Because there are so many different societies, and crime does not relate the same way in all of them, it is very important to make sure that blanket theories are not created in order to try to attack crime on all points within the world.  Rather, there are different rules and structures that play within different areas and may affect crime.  Criminology views crime as something that cannot be avoided at the current time, but perhaps could be at some point when we understand more about interactions between the community and the individual.

