---
title: "Exploring the Basics of Postmodern Criminology"
date: 2020-04-12T04:00:57-08:00
description: "criminology Tips for Web Success"
featured_image: "/images/criminology.jpg"
tags: ["criminology"]
---

Exploring the Basics of Postmodern Criminology 

One of the most current theories to be designed within the science of criminology would be those that adhere to the postmodern perspective.  When it comes to postmodern criminology, one of the most basic beliefs and supposititious is that not only is crime the result of the social interactions in an area, which is the foundation of most conflict theories in criminology, but also that the social context will play a part on the outcome of a situation as well.  This extends on the conflict theories that were created, which suggest that the criminal is responsible for his or her own actions, and that the deviant behavior of the individual is what caused them to go against the social norms that have been established by the ruling government.  By expanding upon theories that have already been created, it is possible for individuals to evolve the beliefs more and hopefully get closer to the truth of identifying how a criminal is created and what effects this has on individuals and the society at large.

Postmodern criminology supporters will look at a crime or criminal action and will go on to ask a very important question.  Was the crime a result of the environment that exists in the society where the crime was committed?  By identifying whether or not the culture was responsible for the crime or not, it is possible to learn more concretely how different instances in an individual’s life will affect them.  In some cases, individuals are forced to go against the normal responses to particular situations.  There are many times in which an individual may have to kill another person, and while this type of violence is rarely enjoyed, it can be a last resort for certain people.  A good example of this having occurred would be to look at an instance in which a policeman had to shoot a suspect in order to save the lives of many innocent people in the immediate area.  The individual policeman cannot be said to be inherently criminal or deviant, because if the shooting is justified than he had no other reaction.  Even if another reaction could have occurred, it may not have been as successful, beneficial or helpful to the individuals that were also involved in the situation.  In making the decision to stop the shooter in the illustrated situation, the policeman stepped beyond the ordinarily imposed social norms that would define murder.  Instead, he is more likely to be seen as providing a service to the individuals that were being threatened in the situation.

By building and rebuilding social contexts and responses, as a whole we can work together to create a better society.  Within a better society, there will be less criminal elements to distract the public.  This is because the responses that we develop will be more likely to benefit others in addition to ourselves in an honest form.  When the society is more stable and healthy the criminal element will not be as prevalent, which is one of the important building blocks of postmodern criminology theories. 

