---
title: "Understanding Streaming Video"
date: 2019-01-02T11:45:58-08:00
description: "video streaming Tips for Web Success"
featured_image: "/images/video streaming.jpg"
tags: ["video streaming"]
---

Understanding Streaming Video

With the internet came a new concept, which is referred to as streaming video.  This seems like a very general term, and many people may not be aware of what the term actually means.  When used on the internet, “streaming” means that a product is being sent from one place to another on a time frame.  Streaming video is a video clip or movie that is being sent over real time from one place to another.  This is a movie that is being constantly supplied to the individuals requesting the video.  The method of the material being transferred is known as streaming, and this is not the medium that is being used.  For example, there is streaming video and streaming audio.  Audio and video are the mediums that are being used in those forms, but the streaming concept refers to the way that the product is being sent from one place to another over the internet or through another method.  Some people do not realize that streaming media was around before the internet, but that it was not referred to as such.  Since there are no so many ways in which people can receive information, including videos, many people are able to understand that there needs to be a distinction between styles of sending.

Streaming video can also be used in order to describe a television channel.  In this way, an individual can acknowledge that while streaming video is not just used on the computer this is a very popular example.  Still, it is used in various other methods around the home.  In some homes, there are security cameras which will stream the video from one part of the home to another area in the home.  Streaming does not have anything to do with the distance over which the video will travel.  Rather, this merely refers to the manner in which the information gets transferred between locations.  The same process can be applied to businesses and offices which is used in the home.  Some alarm companies or security companies will actually allow owners to sign in on the internet from a remote location in order to view the security feeds on the cameras that are placed in the individual owner’s place of business.  Streaming video is important when it comes to entertainment, such as with the television or on the internet, but it is also practical in a number of ways when it comes to security for businesses.  Whether an individual wants to watch a movie on the television or check on the status of their store while they are home, streaming video can help these individuals to accomplish their goals and meet their desires.  Sometimes streaming video will cost money and in order cases it will not cost the individual anything.  It all depends on what is being streamed and where this is taking place.  Many online sources do not charge for streaming video, but in most cases security companies and also the cable company will charge for the streaming videos that the individuals are able to enjoy.

