---
title: "The Worse Elliptical Trainer Ratings"
date: 2021-01-05T18:23:27-08:00
description: "elliptical trainers Tips for Web Success"
featured_image: "/images/elliptical trainers.jpg"
tags: ["elliptical trainers"]
---

The Worse Elliptical Trainer Ratings
	
You have heard about the best elliptical trainer ratings and you know which machines have scored well in their elliptical trainer ratings, however have you heard about the machines that scored poor  elliptical trainer ratings? There are a few out there and they may be surprising to come form some very well trusted names in the exercise equipment industry. We will be going over the elliptical trainer ratings, to help save you the time and money form buying elliptical machines with poor elliptical trainer ratings. These machines received very low elliptical trainer ratings for obvious reasons that you will see. 
	
Nordic Track surprisingly had their elliptical workout machines scoring very low elliptical trainer ratings which seems to some as a surprise since they have produced some very good machines in the past. However they did not receive such great elliptical trainer ratings because their products seemed to be focused more on features, then on the actual quality of the products themselves. It was found that many consumers were satisfied with their purchase since the products are very low in cost compared to other machines, however there were many reports of mechanical problems with the machine s itself. Due to this reason, it is no surprise that Nordic Tracks Elliptical machines received such low elliptical trainer ratings. It seems they could have had better construction in their products, then taking more time to add numerous features. The features are probably the best part of their machines, which probably contributes to their  elliptical trainer ratings, however due to mechanical problems, do not expect the features to last long.
	
Despite Proform having a great reputation, their 900 elliptical machine had some poor elliptical trainer ratings and it is surprising that the product is absolutely worthless. You would not think of any machine made by Proform to receive poor elliptical trainer ratings, however it seems that any of Proforms machines that are not in the EFX series, do not have the same comparable quality. Even the warranties are shorter then average. The Proform 900 elliptical does have some good qualities such as price and low noise, however it does not support heavy users and it is very wobbly. Due to the ninety day warranty, you can expect it to not last long at all which is probably a good indication why it received such poor elliptical trainer ratings. There is no doubt that Proform could have built a cheaper version of their EFX models, and would have received higher elliptical trainer ratings. If you are not buying a Proform EFX model, then it would be best to put your money elsewhere. 
	
Horizon seems to fall into the same category as Nordic Track, which is why their machines also received some of the poorest elliptical trainer ratings for their machines. Their machines have some of the lowest stride lengths in the industry, are not built for tall people and seem to be highly unreliable as well as uncomfortable. Horizon just does not offer a quality product, especially for the prices they demand which is why their elliptical trainer ratings reflect how poor their machines are. Not only are the machines poor, but the selling price is unrealistic, especially when you can buy a better machine for the prices they say they need to be sold at. If you insist on buying a Horizon machine and want to completely ignore their poor elliptical trainer ratings, then it is highly recommended you try out their machines before you buy them. 
	
By avoiding these machines and adhering to the elliptical trainer ratings associated with these products, you will be saving yourself a great deal of disappointment. Remember, these machines and manufacturers received poor elliptical trainer ratings for a reason. This does not mean the manufacturer is unreliable, it just means if they put more care an d quality in these products then they would have received a  better elliptical trainer rating.
