{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}
{\f4\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Helvetica;}{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica-Bold;}{\f174\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f175\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}
{\f177\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f178\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f179\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f180\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}
{\f181\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f182\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f214\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Helvetica CE;}{\f215\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Helvetica Cyr;}
{\f217\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Helvetica Greek;}{\f218\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Helvetica Tur;}{\f219\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Helvetica (Hebrew);}{\f220\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Helvetica (Arabic);}{\f221\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Helvetica Baltic;}
{\f222\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Helvetica (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \ul\cf2 \sbasedon10 \styrsid16253210 Hyperlink;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\pgptbl {\pgp\ipgp2\itap0\li2928\ri0\sb720\sa0}{\pgp\ipgp3\itap0\li0\ri0\sb0\sa0}{\pgp\ipgp4\itap0\li0\ri0\sb0\sa0}{\pgp\ipgp0\itap0\li0\ri0\sb0\sa0}{\pgp\ipgp1\itap0\li0\ri0\sb0\sa0}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid18929
\rsid425124\rsid610447\rsid1334165\rsid1845679\rsid2361435\rsid2372931\rsid2903264\rsid2951456\rsid5003194\rsid5986575\rsid6647582\rsid7360247\rsid7740152\rsid7873346\rsid7949924\rsid8136406\rsid8419027\rsid9183935\rsid9654788\rsid10579999\rsid11762345
\rsid11999126\rsid12598705\rsid12680176\rsid13374143\rsid13390936\rsid14157007\rsid14230089\rsid14959295\rsid16071008\rsid16253210}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.5604;}{\info{\title The Differences Between}{\author A.W.Beckman}
{\operator HP Authorized Customer}{\creatim\yr2005\mo9\dy20\hr15\min10}{\revtim\yr2005\mo12\dy29\hr20\min19}{\version8}{\edmins206}{\nofpages5}{\nofwords2113}{\nofchars9957}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws12077}{\vern24689}}
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nobrkwrptbl\snaptogridincell\allowfieldendsel\wrppunct
\asianbrkrule\rsidroot8136406\newtblstyruls\nogrowautofit \fet0\sectd \linex0\sectdefaultcl\sectrsid9183935\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain 
\qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8136406 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\b\f36\fs30\insrsid8136406 Red Wines vs. White Wines
\par }{\b\f36\fs30\insrsid5003194 
\par }{\b\f36\fs30\insrsid8136406 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8136406 {\f4\insrsid8136406 Most of us know that wine comes from grapes that are aged. But have you ever}{\f4\insrsid9183935  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 
wondered what helps the grape age properly and why red wines need more time to age}{\f4\insrsid9183935  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 than white wines?
\par }{\f4\insrsid9183935 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8136406 The process of aging starts immediately after the grapes are picked, crushed and }{\f4\insrsid16253210 p}{\f4\insrsid8136406 ressed.}{\f4\insrsid9183935   }{\f4\insrsid8136406 
The grapes are then put into an oak barrel or steel vat, with some winemakers preferring to}{\f4\insrsid9183935  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 add oak chips to the vat.}{\f4\insrsid9183935   }{\f4\insrsid8136406 During the aging process }{\f4\insrsid9183935 a}{
\f4\insrsid8136406 cids, sugar and tannin interact. By having more tannin present}{\f4\insrsid9183935  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 the winemaker is able to age the wine for a longer period without fear of oxidation. This}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{
\f4\insrsid8136406 along with temperature, light conditions, and alcohol complete the aging process.}{\f4\insrsid16253210   }{\f4\insrsid8136406 Wines age faster with a warmer temperature. So the winemaker tries to maintain a cool
\par stable 55-65 degree temperature in a dark area as the ideal aging atmosphere. A big}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 fluctuation in temperature or light conditions on a daily or weekly basis is detrimental to a}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{
\f4\insrsid8136406 good wine.
\par }{\f4\insrsid16253210 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8136406 Now why are red wines aged more than white wines? A simple explanation is }{\f4\insrsid16253210 t}{\f4\insrsid8136406 hat all}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 
grapes are white inside, which means that red wine needs to allow the exterior}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 skin to mix}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 
with the interior when being crushed to give it the red color. This mixture contains tannin,}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 which also aids the aging process significantly. You also get tannin from the oak sides of the}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{
\f4\insrsid8136406 barrel. Compounds within these, known as phenolics, allow the wine to age longer while}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 keeping the wine from oxidizing. So the red wine is able to age longer and develop a more}{
\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 full flavored bold taste.
\par White wines have these same compounds but at much lower levels. This is because the}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 inside of the grape is what wine manufacturers mostly use and by not using as much of the}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{
\f4\insrsid8136406 exterior skin less tannin is present. This results in a considerable shorter aging process than}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 a vat with a large amount of tannin present. Attempting to age most white wines over an}{
\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 extended period causes it to flatten and lose some of its aromatic freshness.
\par }{\f4\insrsid16253210 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8136406 So go ahead and save that special red wine for your Grandchild\rquote s marriage, but }{\f4\insrsid16253210 b}{\f4\insrsid8136406 e sure to}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 serve the white wine within two or three years.}{
\f4\insrsid16253210 
\par 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8136406 Wines go through the above process to be ready for consumption. Next the wine is}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 bottled and stored in wine cellars to finish the ageing process. Most wines are consumable}{
\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 when the purchased. The main reason is because no one expects to plan the dinner menu}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 
for that special party two or three years in advance in order to age the correct wine for the}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 occasion. And how many people have a wine cellar to complete the aging process of their}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{
\f4\insrsid8136406 favorite wine?}{\f4\insrsid16253210 
\par }{\f4\insrsid1845679 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid14157007 {\f4\insrsid7949924\charrsid7949924 Wine is also used in religious ceremonies in many cultures}{\f4\insrsid7949924 .}{\f4\insrsid14157007   }{
\f4\insrsid14157007\charrsid14157007 The Bible mentions wine no less than 191 times.}{\f4\insrsid7949924   }{\f4\insrsid14157007\charrsid14157007 
The references in both testaments often admonish the reader to use wine, but to use it properly and not to misuse it.}{\f4\insrsid14157007 
\par }{\f4\insrsid14157007\charrsid14157007 "Forsake not an old friend, for the new is not comparable to him. A new friend is as new wine: when it is old, thou shalt drink it with pleasure."}{\f4\insrsid14157007 
\par }{\f4\insrsid14157007\charrsid14157007  Ecclesiastes 9:10.
\par "Wine was created from the beginning to make men joyful, and not to make men drunk. Wine used with moderation is the joy of the soul and the heart." Ecclesiastes 31:35-36.
\par "Drink no longer water but use a little wine for thy stomach's sake." }{\f4\insrsid14157007 
\par }{\f4\insrsid14157007\charrsid14157007 I Timothy 5:23.}{\f4\insrsid12598705 .}{\f4\insrsid7949924\charrsid7949924 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid7949924 {\f4\insrsid7949924 
\par }{\f4\insrsid1845679\charrsid1845679 The health effects of wine are }{\f4\insrsid14157007 also }{\f4\insrsid1845679\charrsid1845679 the subject of considerable ongoing debate and study. In the USA, a boom 
in red wine consumption was touched off in the 1990s by '60 Minutes', and other news reports on the French paradox.}{\f4\insrsid1845679   }{\f4\insrsid7949924 But now r}{\f4\insrsid8136406 
esearch indicates that moderate red wine consumption may help protect against certain}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 cancers and heart disease, and can have a positive effect on cholesterol levels and blood}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{
\f4\insrsid8136406 pressure.}{\f4\insrsid7949924   }{\f4\insrsid7949924\charrsid7949924 It now seems clear that regular consumption of up to 1-2 drinks a day does reduce mortality, due to 10%\endash 
40% lower risk of coronary heart disease, for those over the age of 35}{\f4\insrsid7949924 .  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 This is because of the presence of antioxidants in the wine as well as significant}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 
amounts of resveratrol, which is naturally present in the grape\rquote s skin.}{\f4\insrsid7949924   The original studies showed this more in red wines due to the higher concentrations of resveratrol.}{\f4\insrsid8136406 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8136406 {\f4\insrsid16253210 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8136406 Resveratrol has been shown previously to have a number of potentially beneficial
\par properties, including antioxidant, anticoagulant, anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer effects.
\par }{\f4\insrsid16253210 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8136406 Here are a few common and uncommon global varieties of wine.
\par }{\f4\insrsid16253210 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8136406 The king of white wines is Chardonnay. It has a vanilla or smoky type aroma and flavor and}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 goes especially well with fish and white meat.
\par }{\f4\insrsid16253210 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8136406 Sauvignon Blanc is another popular white wine which gives off herbal or vegetatal and an}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 ocassional peppery aromas. It has a higher acidity level than the Chardonnay and seafood}{
\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 is a good match for this wine.
\par }{\f4\insrsid16253210 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8136406 Semillon is often blended with Sauvignon Blanc to fill out this more acidic variety of white}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 wines. Semillon alone has more subtle aromas and has a relatively low acidity. Its golden}{
\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 color along with the scent of figs and lemons adds to its attractiveness and it goes well with}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 cheese.}{\f4\insrsid2903264 
  This is one of the few white wines that age very well.}{\f4\insrsid1845679 
\par }{\f4\insrsid1845679\charrsid1845679 Riesling is a }{\f4\insrsid1845679 excellent }{\f4\insrsid1845679\charrsid1845679 wine to have with food, b
ecause of its balance of sugar and acid and its relatively low acidity. It can pair with white fish just like a dry wine, or with pork, and it can }{\f4\insrsid1845679 also }{\f4\insrsid1845679\charrsid1845679 
stand up to Thai and Chinese cuisine. Riesling's typical aromas are of flowers, tropical fruits, and mineral stone}{\f4\insrsid1845679 .  This wine is almost never oaked, which then leads itself to suitability with most foods.
\par }{\f4\insrsid12598705 
\par }{\f4\insrsid12598705\charrsid12598705 F}{\f4\insrsid12598705 rascati }{\f4\insrsid12598705\charrsid12598705 has been called the \'93Gold Wine\'94 from the ancient Romans, and it was }{\f4\insrsid12598705 reported to be the }{
\f4\insrsid12598705\charrsid12598705 favorite wine of Pope Gregorio XVI.  }{\f4\insrsid12598705 Frascati }{\f4\insrsid12598705\charrsid12598705 is a vintage wine that is dry, crisp, pale yellow and fresh.  }{\f4\insrsid2903264 
It goes very well with soups, seafood, poultry and other light dishes.  It is served best cold.}{\f4\insrsid12598705 
\par }{\f4\insrsid2903264 
\par }{\f4\insrsid7740152 Chenin, the best of these }{\f4\insrsid7740152\charrsid7740152 wines have generally come from France, where its versatility is exploited to great
 effect. The sweet wines are among the longest-lasting of all wines, and the great dry white wines of the region are often listed among France's finest whites.}{\f4\insrsid7740152 
\par The }{\f4\insrsid2903264\charrsid2903264 Chenin is }{\f4\insrsid7740152 also }{\f4\insrsid2903264\charrsid2903264 the most widely-grown grape in South Africa, accounting for around 30 percent
 of the country's vines. The wine made there is generally bland and acidic, often with overtones of grass or green apples.}{\f4\insrsid7740152  It is for this reason that in the U.S. it }{\f4\insrsid7740152\charrsid7740152 
often ends up in the generic jug wines of bulk producers as acidity enhancer for high sugar/alcohol blends.}{\f4\insrsid7740152 
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid11762345 {\f4\insrsid7740152\charrsid7740152 Pouilly-Fuiss\'e9 is a dry, medium-full bodied, white wine from}{\f4\insrsid7740152  }{\f4\insrsid11762345 France.  This wine became popular the 1980
\rquote s.  Sudden demand and supply drove prices up.  It then received the complaint of being over priced.  This will still be the case today at some times.  }{\f4\insrsid11762345\charrsid11762345 Pale buttery gold }{\f4\insrsid11762345 
color with a floral and fruity bouquet with hints of honey and hazelnuts with the taste of apples sets this wine apart.  Served at 55 degrees fairenheit this wine goes well with }{\f4\insrsid11762345\charrsid11762345 
with smoked fish, fish grilled or in a sauce, poultry and white meats, including turkey and pork, creamy cheeses.}{\f4\insrsid2903264 
\par }{\f4\insrsid11762345 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8136406 {\f4\insrsid14959295\charrsid14959295 Silvaner}{\f4\insrsid14959295  was the most dominate variety in Germany until approximately the late 1970\rquote s.  Originally from Austria}{
\f4\insrsid14959295\charrsid14959295 , it pairs extremely well with foods that have mild flavors - rice dishes that do not involve a lot of spices, mild chicken dishes, }{\f4\insrsid14959295 
to name a couple.  The reason for this is, the wine is a very gentle low keyed fruity tasting wine very light in acid.}{\f4\insrsid1845679 
\par }{\f4\insrsid14959295 
\par }{\f4\insrsid14959295\charrsid14959295 Pedro Xim\'e9nez}{\f4\insrsid14959295  a desert wine from Spain.  This wine has a very }{\f4\insrsid14959295\charrsid14959295 strong taste of raisins and molasses}{\f4\insrsid14959295 .}{\f4\insrsid10579999 
  A syrupy kind of wine goes very well with coffee or over vanilla ice cream in the summer.  Some say this desert wine borders a high end desert Sherry.}{\f4\insrsid1845679\charrsid1845679 
\par }{\f4\insrsid16253210 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid5003194 {\f4\insrsid8136406 Among the red wines Cabernet Sauvignon is always a favorite. It ripens late and is best}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 
suited for clay soil and moderate temperatures because it requires a longer season for the}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 grapes to ripen. Accompanied by salmon, trout and other sauce-free meats it is the favorite}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{
\f4\insrsid8136406 red wine of many.}{\f4\insrsid11762345 \line }{\f4\insrsid7740152 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8136406 {\f4\insrsid8136406 Merlot is another red wine that has grown in popularity. Its dark color, high alcohol content}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 
and full body make this wine very supple and velvety. It has three flavors; the currant and}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 cherry flavor, the more herby style of plumb flavoring and the cherry and chocolate flavor.}{\f4\insrsid16253210   }{
\f4\insrsid8136406 This simple light flavored wine goes well with pates, game, and many casseroles.}{\f4\insrsid14230089 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8136406 Pinot Noir is one of the more challenging wines for winemakers, but that is what makes it}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 exceptional. It is lighter in color than either of the other two red wines we have discussed. It}{
\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 is relatively high in alcohol and is medium to high in acidity. Its aroma is one of wilted roses}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 with a hint of cola. It goes particularly well with c
oq au vin, boeuf bourguignon, rabbit, ham,}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 chicken and steak. In some areas you may pay more for this wine, but it is well worth the}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 price.
\par }{\f4\insrsid10579999 
\par }{\f4\insrsid10579999\charrsid10579999 Zinfandel, also known as Zin, is a red-skinned wine grape popular in California }{\f4\insrsid10579999 because of }{\f4\insrsid10579999\charrsid10579999 its intense fruitiness and lush texture.}{\f4\insrsid10579999 
  The red grape was extremely popular with home wine makers in the United States}{\f4\insrsid13374143  during the }{\f4\insrsid13374143\charrsid13374143 prohibition}{\f4\insrsid10579999 
.  This was due to the very thick skin of the grape.  This then made transportation very easy.  }{\f4\insrsid10579999\charrsid10579999 Typically, Zinfandel tastes of bramble and fresh or fermented red berries}{\f4\insrsid10579999 .}{\f4\insrsid13374143 
  This wine goes well with typical American food- pizza, burgers.  It will accent most red sauce meals.  It is best served at about 65 degrees.}{\f4\insrsid16253210 
\par }{\f4\insrsid13374143 
\par }{\f4\insrsid13374143\charrsid13374143 Chianti is Italy}{\f4\insrsid13374143 's most famous red wine.  }{\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 Unlike }{\f4\insrsid6647582 a }{\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 Cabernet Sauvignon}{\f4\insrsid6647582  }{
\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 Chianti doesn't }{\f4\insrsid6647582 drink }{\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 well by itself.}{\f4\insrsid6647582   }{\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 But when }{\f4\insrsid6647582 drank }{
\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 with food,}{\f4\insrsid6647582  it is a very bold wine and goes with just about any food}{\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 . Chianti's acidity matches }{\f4\insrsid6647582 extremely well }{
\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 with acidic foods like tomatoes}{\f4\insrsid6647582 , }{\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 rich dishes like braised rabbit}{\f4\insrsid6647582  and mature chees
es.  The aroma is a hint of violet, with a bright ruby red color.}{\f4\insrsid13374143 
\par }{\f4\insrsid6647582 
\par }{\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 Rioja red wines are classified into four categories. The first, "Rioja", is the youngest, spending less than a year in oak}{\f4\insrsid6647582  ageing}{\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 .}{\f4\insrsid6647582   }{
\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 A "crianza" is wine aged for at least two years, at least
 one of which was in oak. "Rioja Reserva" is aged for at least three years, of which at least one year is in oak. Finally, "Rioja Gran Reserva" wines have been aged at least two years in oak and three years in bottle. }{\f4\insrsid18929 
Because of the ageing times the }{\f4\insrsid6647582\charrsid6647582 Reserva and Gran Reserva wines are not necessary produced each year}{\f4\insrsid6647582 .  This wine ages well and has a delicate fruity flavor to go well with }{\f4\insrsid12680176 
steak and other heavy foods.}{\f4\insrsid6647582 
\par }{\f4\insrsid18929 
\par Lets explore some of the not so common wines.  They may be uncommon but they are all excellent wines in their own right.}{\f4\insrsid13374143 
\par 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8136406 One of the more uncommon but interesting wines is the Norton wine. In 1835, Dr. Daniel}{\f4\insrsid16071008  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 Norton of Virginia developed this variety of grapes that was originally known as the Virginia}{
\f4\insrsid16071008  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 Seedling. It is widely planted in the Midwest where it is sometimes called Cynthiana and}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 
produces a dark, inky wine with plum and cherry flavoring. Horton Vineyards in Virginia is}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 particularly interested in reviving the grape's reputation.}{\f4\insrsid16253210 
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid8419027 {\f4\insrsid8136406 Another rare but interesting wine is the Muscadine wine. It was first discovered by}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 
European explorers, who found native American vines growing along the low-lyingsouthern coastal regions. Most Muscadine wines (red and white) are blends, usually given}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 
proprietary names by the winery (e.g., "Vintners' Blend"), and vinified in a sweet or semisweet}{\f4\insrsid16253210  }{\f4\insrsid8136406 style. Muscadine and its blends have a unique wild and musky aroma and flavor.}{\f4\insrsid14230089 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8419027\charrsid8419027 Centurion }{\f4\insrsid8419027 a uncommon wine that hasn\rquote t yet seen widespread acceptance.  This wine was }{\f4\insrsid8419027\charrsid8419027 
developed at the U.C. Davis campus by crossing Cabernet Sauvignon, with Grenache and Carignane. The intention was to produce a Cabernet-like wine which could be grown in the relatively hot Central Valley}{\f4\insrsid8419027 .  Even with it\rquote 
s limited exposure ot wine lovers, }{\f4\insrsid8419027\charrsid8419027 is a definite improvement over traditional Central Valley varieties.}{\f4\insrsid18929 
\par }{\f4\insrsid8419027 
\par }{\f4\insrsid5986575\charrsid5986575 Roussanne probably gets its name from the light-brownish russet cast of its ripe berries.}{\f4\insrsid5986575   }{\f4\insrsid5986575\charrsid5986575 The aroma }{\f4\insrsid5986575 is}{
\f4\insrsid5986575\charrsid5986575  not }{\f4\insrsid5986575 as overtly fruity as some types and }{\f4\insrsid5986575\charrsid5986575 can suggest wild flowers or herbal tea.}{\f4\insrsid5986575   }{\f4\insrsid5986575\charrsid5986575 
Unlike most white wines, Roussanne ages very well due to its unusual combination of richness and crisp acids}{\f4\insrsid5986575 .}{\f4\insrsid8419027 
\par }{\f4\insrsid5986575 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid5986575 {\f4\insrsid5986575 Marsanne, this wine sometimes uses Roussane as a blending partner.  }{\f4\insrsid5986575\charrsid5986575 
It makes wines that are medium dry, full bodied and very rich in flavor with notes of spice and pear.}{\f4\insrsid2951456   It is a very deep-colored wine that is fairly full bodied to the point of being described sometimes as waxy.}{
\f4\insrsid5986575\charrsid5986575 
\par }}