---
title: "What is Homeschooling"
date: 2023-01-26T14:47:46-08:00
description: "Home Schooling Tips for Web Success"
featured_image: "/images/Home Schooling.jpg"
tags: ["Home Schooling"]
---

What is Homeschooling

The term 'homeschooling' basically refers to the process in which 
one or more children of not more than 2 families are instructed by 
parents or legal guardians, or a member of either household. The 
laws that define homeschooling vary from State to State. The legal 
requirements for establishing a homeschool also vary with the 
State. 

For most children, the actual process of learning begins much 
before school. Many children already know their alphabets, the 
names of animals, colors and other more complicated stuff before 
they reach school. This is mostly due to the hard work of a member 
of the family who has taken the time to teach the child. 
Homeschooling is just a natural progression from here. Instead of 
sending their children to a public school, parents make their own 
curriculum and teach their children in ways that best suit the 
child. This is homeschooling, in its most simplistic form.

Before you decide to go in for homeschooling, there are certain 
important matters for consideration. First off, meet with parents 
of other homeschoolers. Find out the pros and cons of 
homeschooling. Then ask yourself why you would want to adopt this 
method. This is a very important aspect, as the success of the 
program depends on the clarity and sincerity of your purpose.

Next, it is time to consider the expenses of homeschooling. It may 
cost anywhere between a few hundred dollars to a few thousand 
every year. More importantly, you are also effectively shutting 
out any job opportunity for one of the parents. It is only obvious 
that one parent will have to stay at home full time to manage the 
homeschool. A home-based business however is a great alternative.

Are you qualified to take on homeschooling for your children? 
Teaching is a continuation of your own learning process. With the 
advent of the internet, information is aplenty. There are various 
books and resources for those interested in homeschooling. Go 
through the various methods of homeschooling and choose one that 
is most suited to you. It helps if you know what kind of learning 
style your child has. Also, find out what your child feels about 
homeschooling before you start. 

Every state has its own laws regarding homeschooling. For 
instance, in North Carolina, you must first file a 'Notice of 
Intent' to start a home school. In this you have to mention if the 
school is a 'Private church' school or a 'qualified non-public 
school'. The persons providing the education are required to have 
at least a high school diploma. You have to maintain an annual 
record of the child's attendance and disease immunization. Every 
year, the child is required to undergo a standardized test. Each 
student attending the eleventh grade has to take a nationally 
standardized test. These are the requirements in North Carolina, 
but it is enough to give you a good idea of what homeschooling 
entails. 

Homeschooling may seem like a lot of fun and freedom from the 
outside. However, things are seldom as simple as they seem. 
Homeschooling is a lot of added responsibility and hard work. But, 
if successful, it will forge a strong bond of love and respect 
between parent and child, while providing your child with the best 
form of education he needs.


(word count 542)

PPPPP
